The woman Ottis Toole called "Mama Betty," who had been the landlady and employer of both Toole and Lucas, sat out on the porch on a summer's day in 1991, rocked and talked to Sondra London about two of the most prolific serial killers in modern history:
	Ottis just brought him in here one day and said, "Betty, I want you to meet my friend. His name is Lucas and he's gone be around the place and help me work around here."
	And Lucas looked like he was staying pretty drunk and Ottis looked like he was staying about half-drunk or pilled up or something, and he got where he was falling down on the work and wasn't helping me, and all they wanted to do was get in that old car and go to ridin' and ridin', half-drunk and doped up, and they come in there in the dining room and want some money off'n me and I said, "Listen, I'm gone tell y'all right now, you ain't gone get a dime outta me, 'less you get outta here and go to work or help me do this work around here. I'm not givin' you nothin'!"
	But I didn't worry about them none, because I always had a pistol pretty handy too, you know. And Ottis and Lucas are not gone come in here and jump on me, because Ottis knew how I was and he knew I wouldn't back down from 'em, and if they jumped on me, I would've just shot 'em, that's all. I put my foot down pretty much, and Ottis knew that what I said WENT. It HAD to go. And he looked up to me, you know.
	Ottis was a mama's boy. He was a queer, and she knew he was a queer, and she was the sole person between him and his brothers, you know. And it was always my mama done this, and my mama done that, and then after she died, I was his mama then. You see them letters he wrote me, he'd say, "Mama Betty, Mama Betty, Mama Betty." And "I love you, Mama Betty." That's how he always ended the letters.
	He always relied on his mother for everything and she told him everything to do, and he listened. That was his love and the only thing in his life that he really loved. I never heard anything about his father.
	But his mother, she give him a bed to sleep on and she give him something good to eat and a roof over his head and kept ever'thing warm, and they always had somebody living there with 'em, she had her grandchildren and all of them out there.
	I remember when he would go all the way out to his mother's grave and he told me when he got out there, the grave would tremble. He went out there quite often. He said he'd sit on the head of the grave and it would just tremble. He'd come back wore out and tired, with the sweat just pouring off of him. Look like he'd run all the way home from the cemetery.
	I don't think that any man Ottis ever had really cared anything about him. So when he got Lucas, he got him a companion. And Lucas got a home to stay in. He was on the street, didn't have no place to live, and Ottis come and took him out of the mission and carried him home with him, and Ottis was expecting something, you know, expecting to have a love affair with him. He ain't gone drag a man out there and give him free rent and do this and do that for him unless he, you know... but Henry just more or less wanted a place to live.
	I always looked at Lucas as the man and Ottis as the woman. He always said Lucas was the only man he ever loved. And Ottis was jealous over Lucas. Just like Ottis told me, he said Lucas was not a queer. He said, "I'm the one pushed it," he said, "because I wanted sex with Lucas. He said, "I'm the one that forced Lucas to have sex with me."
	Ottis had Jesus Christ's picture on his wall in there for a long time. Then one day he come in with the Devil's picture. And he said, "Well, I'll put one on each side of the room, and I'll look at the Devil and then I'll look at Jesus Christ."
	Ottis said him and Lucas went to California and that's where they got into this group. When they went in there, the rite was that they would kill somebody and they would have to drink the human blood, and they had some kind of insignia that they'd put on your skin showing that you would belong to the group.
	I understood that they did put something on Lucas, but I never have seen it. But when they got to Ottis, they looked into his eyes and they said, "You're the very Devil himself, we don't need to put no mark on you."
	He told me they had one in Florida. He said they would notify him when one was going to happen. He said, don't you know when I'd disappear once in a while... and I didn't know when that would be, because the only time he could disappear would be at night. He'd get off at about 8 o'clock and he would go do whatever he'd want to. He was in and out all the time.
	But he said these guys wore hoods and they had the meetings way out in the woods. He said he would go to it whenever it was being helt. But they wore hoods, you know, and he said you never knew who was under them hoods. He said they didn't want nobody to know who they was.
	And he said once you got in that thing, there was no pulling out of it, and if you tried to get out of it, that was your death warrant, because they'd come out and kill you. He said that's the reason they wore them hoods, because if they took a notion to kill somebody, if they thought somebody was out running their mouth about it, they would come out and kill 'em.
	He said they sacrificed human beings and drank human blood. But he never told me about that when he was living here. He didn't tell me that until he was in the county jail. He was in there about three or four months and he'd call me nearly ever' day.
	One morning I came in here in the office, and Ottis was sitting at the office desk, and he smiled, and he said, "I want you to meet my two friends." And when I looked at them guys, and they looked at me, and they hung their heads down like they were shamed. And he said, "I'll tell you sons of bitches right now," he said, "Y'all shamed of me? Get your asses up and get 'em out! Right now!" That's what Ottis told 'em.
	Cause when I come in, both of 'em was sittin' on that couch right there, and both of 'em hung their heads down. I don't know if they knew me or saw me before, or didn't want me to catch up with 'em being with a queer or what, but they were ashamed of him and he knew it. "Both you sons of bitches get out of here! Shamed of me? You get out of here and don't come back!"
	Ottis calls himself a woman. When he's out at work, he don't talk about that stuff too much, he just does his work, he don't have time for all that gay talk. But otherwise, he's like a woman. He wants to get in there and fix up things and make them look pretty -- kind of feminine, you know. And he would put a wig and a dress on and go down there on Main Street looking like a woman.
	There was an old attic I had in that house at 217 First Street and he asked me if he could have it and I told him, you want to stay up in the attic, it's all right with me. It was a big place. And he put two or three couches in there and two or three beds in there, and the next thing I know, he's chargin' 'em so much a night to stay up 'ere in that place.
	Then it come to me about his shows up there. These guys will get to talking, you know, and know pretty much ever'thing that goes on around here. Said Ottis would get flowers and plants and hang 'em from the rafters up there in the ceilings. The attic had some little windows on the sides and he had some curtains rigged up there. It wasn't nothing fancy or nothing like that, but he did have it fixed up right nice. And he would have these men up there and put on a show -- dress up like a woman and fix all this food and beer and stuff.
	And I told him I was going to have to put a stop to that, because he was running me some competition, renting out the bed and serving the food and putting on a show. That was when I fired him and he went to live over there in that shack on Market Street. But no sooner did he move than he come begging me to take him back and sayin' he wouldn't do nothin' like that no more, he'd work for free and he'd do anything I want, if I'd just take him back.
	The reason Ottis wanted to stay here is we got 50 to 75 men in these houses, and he's always in and out cleaning up, and he sees all these men. It's just like at the penitentiary. He gets in that penitentiary, he probably likes it. Because he's queer, he's a female, and he's got all them men.
	One day right before Ottis was arrested, me and him was sitting here when we heard a man holler and we looked out in the alley and there was an old man, and a nigger had his arm around his neck and he was robbing him. And so I got my gun, and me and Ottis went out there, and I pulled the gun on the nigger and said, "Give me the money." I said, "You better give us all that money, or you're gone be dead." So the old nigger pulled out the money and handed it to me.
	So Ottis held onto him and while I called the police and they come out and put him in jail. Then they took us down and took a picture of us, and they give me and Ottis a Certificate for being Outstanding Citizens. I got my Certificate here somewhere, but they found out about the arson right after that, and I never got the picture.
	Then right after the fire, Ottis had boarded up this house to keep ever'body out of here until we decided to get started working on the house. So Ottis come down here and told me, "Betty, there's someone in the house hammering." So I said, "Ottis, why don't you go in there and see?" He said, "Naw, I ain't going in there." So I said, "I'll go in there and check myself."
	So I got the gun and come in the house, and Ottis followed me up the stairs. And when I got up to the top of the stairs, this nigger and this white boy was in the bathroom, and they was tearing all the plumbing out. And I said, "Hey, what are y'all doing in here?" And I pulled the gun on 'em. And I said, "Now, y'all stay right here." And I told Ottis, I said, "Ottis, you go call the police and bring them up here."
	In the meantime there was a window that went out on the back porch up there, the upstairs porch, and they were scared, you know. So they went to climbing out the porch. And when one jumped off the roof, I pulled the gun and I shot him.

I didn't think I hit him, but I got him in the leg. And the police come, and I said, "Well, they're already gone now." And Ottis was just shaking all over. He was going all to pieces. I didn't know the man was shot.
	And then in a little while, here come the police looking for me. And he said, "Betty, why didn't you tell us that you shot him?" I said, "Well, I didn't know I did."
	I didn't tell the police nothing about it. You know, as they jumped off the roof, I shot the white one in the leg, and they went running down the alley. Somebody said they run ever' red light getting to the hospital, old boy thought he was gone bleed to death. He told them that I was the one shot him. So here come the cops to look me up about shooting him.
	And I told the cops, I said, "What happened is, I had that house with NO TRESPASSING signs on it, and Ottis come to me and said that there was somebody in the house, and he was too scared to go in there and check it out to see who it was, so I got my gun and I said, 'Come on, Ottis, let's go.' And I come on over here, and sure enough."
	So they took us to the police station for questioning, and here come the old boy in there, and he had his leg bandaged up to his knee. And he was telling the cops down there he was going to sue me, and he was going to do this and do that, you know, and the police said, "Well, we gone put a warrant on you for breaking and entering." And that was all there was to it, and they turnt him aloose.
	His grandmother lived in the house back here, and she said that boy was pretty wild when that happened, but he had changed his life after he got shot.
	This is the statement I gave to Sondra London in my office at 117 E. Second St., Jacksonville, Florida, on June 17, 1991. I have read it and it is correct.
	
	
