Windows To Fantasy
You’d think even the most dedicated voyeur must have bad nights. True enough, but this one never wasted time on unattractive targets. His mission always consisted of beautiful women. He had several backups. If one objective didn’t work out, the next one would. He covered a lot of ground.
Take for instance this one gorgeous babe he used to look in on. She lived a good six miles from the little house on Canal Street. He knew her routine down to the days she had her period. He would rise early (4:00 A.M.) and jog the six miles to her parents’ home in near-freezing temperatures to watch her get up, go through her daily devotional, and have her bath, before she went to work. She was one beautiful babe! The hopeless dreamer fell in love with her.

 

Well, as the seasons began to change, sunrise came earlier and earlier, until one morning the Eyes were outside her bathroom window when morning broke. The cloak of darkness was yanked away, revealing the voyeur’s presence. But he couldn’t make himself leave. He had to see her — possess her in his mind one more time.
As she was drying off her silky skin, she saw the man in the window staring at her. Their eyes met. She froze. She stared back at him. For a moment frozen in time, they stared deeply into each other’s eyes. The voyeur came — then left, never to return.
Look, I am not so dense I don’t realize that in real life, girls don’t get off on strange shadowy figures peering through their bathroom windows lusting for their charms. That young damsel that caught me checking her out at dawn was so petrified that she couldn’t even move! That’s what I saw in those pretty baby blues — shock! That would be the natural response when one’s privacy is invaded, especially a woman’s bathroom sanctuary. I doubt very seriously that the lady was turned on by it all. The main reason why I never went back to her window was the element of secrecy had been compromised.
This time the voyeur was cruising a new neighborhood in Bossier City searching for a window to his fantasy.
He parked his canary yellow ‘71 Malibu in the parking lot of a shopping center near a Kentucky Fried Chicken and set out on foot, drawing on the thin black leather gloves he kept in the glove box of the Chevy.
Time, approximately 11:00 P.M. Moving in and out of strangers’ back yards, checking out the lay of the land, he came upon a house standing by a vacant lot. Like a moth to the flame, he was drawn to it.
No rest for the wicked. Peering in one window after another, the Eyes quickly discovered it was occupied by a gorgeous young blonde. Time passed and the damsel finally retired around 12:00 midnight.
Danny had not come to harm anyone, so Ennad took control. It would be rape, not murder. He searched the carport and found an old black t-shirt. Poking holes in it, he fashioned it into a mask and pulled it over his head.
At that moment, the Dark One grew ever greater — ever stronger. Gemini had arrived, thirsting for blood. But this night, thank God, he would be denied his crimson flow of pain. Instead of a red river, it would be just a stream easily dammed.
The front door was opened and the Evil entered the sleeping woman’s home. Danny had brought no blade or weapon of any kind, but Gemini searched the kitchen in darkness, and the street light pouring in the window revealing a large, sharp carving knife on the cabinet counter.
The air became very still as the intruder crept stealthily into the young woman’s bedroom. The Dark Shadow stood over her bed and watched the gentle rise and fall of her chest as she slept. Suddenly, the blonde sensed a presence. She awoke to a masked Reaper hovering over her, brandishing a carving knife.
Shocked and terrified, she screamed! But only once, and briefly at that.
The intruder quickly subdued his prey. But during the struggle, the woman reached up and grabbed the blade of the knife to defend herself. S-S-SHUCK! It was yanked from her grasp, slicing her thumb and palm to the bone. By this point, the attacker was on top of the woman, muffling the screams with his hand over her mouth. The woman settled down after being cut.
“Let’s take a look at you, lovely.” And he eased up the t-shirt over her breasts. She was about to die, but a very unusual thing happened, which entered the mind of Gemini and drove him away.
The woman had an infant perhaps eight months old lying next to her. The child had been overlooked until then. She did not cry or appear frightened, but rather interested. She just sucked on her bottle and gazed wide-eyed with wonder at the strange man on top of her mother. At that moment Gemini was conquered by the innocent eyes of a tender child.
The little angel took the nipple of her bottle out of her mouth and smiled sweetly at the masked figure. It was a smile that could light the world with joy. Something in that beautiful infant’s eyes drove the Evil Spirit away and Danny regained his natural self. He saw the blood on the terrified blonde and on himself.
“Oh, Lady! I’m sorry! I — I didn’t mean to hurt you.” And he got up off the traumatized woman.
She looked confused. Then slowly, carefully, like a caged wild animal whose captor just released it from prison, she got out of bed, then dashed out of the house barefoot in her t-shirt and panties, screaming at the top of her lungs!
The child was left behind and Danny stood there alone, admiring the calm, angelic behavior the infant exhibited. She just lay there in her spot and resumed feeding on her baby bottle, completely satisfied. Realizing the child would be all right, Danny fled into the night.
That woman had looked into the eyes of DEATH. But that night the bewildering gaze of a wide-eyed child conquered, as Evil gave way to Innocence.
Danny would never forget the eyes of that precious child. They held the same look he once saw in the eyes of his own child, Kiley — the very same look. It was as if Kiley were looking at her father, pleading with her beautiful blue eyes, “Don’t do this, Daddy, please don’t do this!”
